# Blog Posts

## [François Chollet](https://fchollet.com/#essays)

Software engineer and AI researcher. Co-founder Ndea, ARC Prize.

Primary interests:

Understanding the nature of abstraction and developing algorithms capable of autonomous abstraction (i.e. general intelligence) Democratizing the development and deployment of AI technology, by making it easier to use and explaining it clearly Leveraging technology, in particular AI, to help people gain greater agency over their circumstances and reach their full potential (e.g. EdTech, steerable recommendation engines, personal productivity tech, etc.) Understanding and simulating the early stages of human cognitive development (e.g. developmental psychology, cognitive developmental robotics)

F. Chollet

2021

In this revised and expanded new edition, Keras creator François Chollet offers insights for both novice and experienced machine learning practitioners. As you move through this book, you’ll build your understanding through intuitive explanations, crisp color illustrations, and clear examples. You’ll quickly pick up the skills you need to start developing deep-learning applications.

F. Chollet

2017

Deep Learning with Python introduces the field of deep learning using the Python language and the powerful Keras library. This book builds your understanding through intuitive explanations and practical examples. You'll explore challenging concepts and practice with applications in computer vision, natural-language processing, and generative models. By the time you finish, you'll have the knowledge and hands-on skills to apply deep learning in your own projects.

German

Chinese (simplified)

Japanese

Korean

Spanish

French

Turkish

Polish

Chinese (traditional)

Russian

Italian

---

## [The Singularity is not coming](https://fchollet.com/blog/the-singularity-is-not-coming.html)

2012/08/10

Note from the future: this 2018 article by P. Collison and M. Nielsen now provides data to back up this hypothesis. What follows is from 2012. If you are tech-savvy, by that point you have almost certainly come across the idea of the Singularity [1] as defended by futurists like Ray Kurzweil and Vernor Vinge. As a reminder, it is the notion that, when we are at last able to compile a smarter-than-human artificial intelligence, this AI will in turn manage to improve its own design, and so on, resulting in an out-of control loop of "intelligence explosion" [2] with unpredictable technological consequences. (Singularists go on to predict that after this happens we will merge with machines, live forever, upload our minds into computers, etc.) What's more, this seemingly far-future revolution would happen within just a few decades (2040 is often mentioned, though it's getting pushed back every now and then), due to the "exponential" rate of progress of science. That this deadline would arrive just in time to save the proponents of the Singularity from old age is just a weird coincidence that ought to be ignored. As a scientist, I find the claim that scientific progress is exponential to be extremely dubious. If I look at my own field, or at any field that I am vaguely familiar with, I observe roughly linear progress, at a rate that has typically been going on since as far back as the field's foundation. Exponential progress claims are usually supported by the most bogus metrics, such as the number of US patents filled per year [3] (which is a measure of the number of people employed in a field, not a measure of the speed of its progress). And as somebody who does AI research, I find the notion of "intelligence explosion" to make no sense, for reasons reaching back to the very definition of intelligence. But I am not going to argue about that right now, as isn't even necessary to invalidate the notion of the Singularity. “ A hypothetical self-improving AI would see its own intelligence stagnate soon enough, rather than explode I would like to simply argue that scientific progress is in fact linear, and this despite the capitalization of past results into current research ("accelerating returns"), and despite an exponentially increasing population of scientists and engineers working on advancing it (resource explosion). And since I don't want to argue in the realm of opinion, I am going to propose a simple, convincing mathematical model of the progress of science. Using the same model, I'll point out that a hypothetical self-improving AI would actually see its own research progress and intelligence stagnate soon enough, rather than explode –unless we provide it with exponentially increasing computing resources, in which case it may do linear progress (or even better, given a fast enough exponential rate of resource increase). The problem of progress The resources that we devote to science have been exploding throughout history. The world population of scientists has been doubling roughly every 50 years from 1500 to 1900 [4], and has kept an exponential rate throughout the 20th century as well, by what seems to be a factor of 10 every 50 years [5] (it is however unclear whether that growth is still being sustained now [5], and even if still exponential the rate has evidently gotten slower). Likewise, the number of papers and patents has followed exponential growth during the past century, unsurprisingly since average paper count per scientist is unlikely to change significantly. Besides available researcher brains, the computing resources available to science have followed exponential growth as well (Moore's law) in the past 50 years. Furthermore, each new scientific discovery accelerates the pace of science to some extent, because it gives future researcher a better understanding of the field considered, as well as new tools to work with. That's "accelerating returns". You get to stand on the shoulders of giants. And yet despite all this, if you look at the actual understanding of the world that we have achieved, if you look at real *impact* rather mere volume, the general impression you get is that scientific progress has really been linear. We didn't "get" physics 50 times better in 1990 compared to 1940. The 1940-1990 progress of physics might even have been slightly less significant than the 1890-1940 one, actually. Even in a new, ultra-fast growing field such as computer science, most of the state of the art algorithms currently around date back from the 60s and 70s. Our computers may be 10^6 faster now than in 1960, but our knowledge is only a few times broader, our algorithm libraries only a few times better. Likewise neuroscience and AI have followed slow, noticeably linear growth since the 50s. So how do we explain that huge dichotomy between exponential resource growth and perceived linear progress? What's happening? Well, a widely-noticed empirical fact about science is that within a given field, making an impact is getting exponentially more difficult over time. Just look: the big discoveries in quantum physics had all been reaped by 1930. Most of what could be said in Newtonian physics had been said by Newton himself. Information Theory researchers will never surpass in impact the single 1948 paper that founded their field, no matter how long and fruitful their career. The list could go on. In fact, the only way you could hope to really matter in science these days is by founding a new field or subfield –by augmenting a research axiom to the point that it frees new potential big discoveries. Imagination trumps intelligence and hard work every time. The reason is simply that founders and first comers reap all of the high-impact low-hanging fruit, and thus after each major discovery, the amount of effort to reach the next one gets multiplied by a certain factor. By the time you join a field where 10,000 people have already spent their career, your impact expectation will be low, and your thesis title seriously obscure. Let's come up with a trivial model and see if increase in discovery difficulty really is *exponential* (or inversely, that at equal difficulty, discovery impact is getting exponentially lower –both are strictly equivalent). If you're already convinced, skip to the next part! Science gets exponentially harder Let's consider a finite set of potential discoveries D within a new scientific field (let's say 100 discoveries). Each potential finding has an "impact" value following a random uniform distribution between two extrema (let's say, a random integer between 0 and 100), and an "effort necessary for discovery" also following a random uniform distribution (let's go again for 0-100). The values I'm mentioning are unimportant and are there to allow you to visualize the problem, dear reader, the only meaningful thing is that I chose random uniform distributions in both cases, which I do because I have no data. Anything else than pure randomness would be too wild a guess. Now let's have a population of researchers that each have an equal number of "effort points" to spend on discoveries over their careers, let's say 100 points. They come in succession, and each researcher tries to maximize the total impact she can make within the effort she can spend. The sum of the effort factors of the discoveries they make must be smaller or equal to their total effort points. Of course, discoveries can't be made twice.

“ A hypothetical self-improving AI would see its own intelligence stagnate soon enough, rather than explode

The problem of progress

Science gets exponentially harder

The case of the self-improving AI

Paradigm shifts and imagination

“ The total quantity of intelligence and hard work available around you is millionfolds what you can provide –you're just a drop of water in the ocean

References

---

## [The Good Librarian](https://fchollet.com/blog/the-good-librarian.html)

2011/04/30

Current Web products tend to concentrate on how to better organize and develop the flow of information (how to share more content more easily, how to reach a larger crowd, how to get more of the content you already spend the most time on, etc), while mostly ignoring the psychological aspects of content sharing and content creation. This results in awesome communication tools that are used mostly for dynamics of collective stupidity. Don't see what I mean? Check out the current trending topics on Twitter –a fantastic product as far as sharing is concerned. That's what the web of the future could be about: sharing more mediocrity, more easily. Incredible technology turned into a sad Skinner box. Is this what we really need? The thing is, contrarily to the philosophy behind past web products, our means of communication are not in fact content-neutral, and more does not mean better. Technology shapes the nature and quality of the content that dominates the web. But the content-propagation criteria that companies have been leaning towards so far, for commercial reasons –lowest-denominator-type catchiness, critical-mass-type popularity– are just not bringing the best out of each of us. Today, there is a real need to incorporate into web products some sort of strategy for bettering the quality of the content being produced and consumed. “ There's a real need to incorporate into web products some sort of strategy for bettering the quality of the content being produced and consumed That can only be done by incorporating a focus on users' psychology into our designs. How can we motivate our users to create and share better content? How can we give them the means to do so –both inspiration and technical know-how? How can we favor the spread of high-quality content? How can we develop the crowd's collective intelligence and inhibit current dynamics of collective stupidity? Here are some ideas for developing a creativity-focused social media product. Get users to start up content-production projects, and give value to these projects Only if people have projects at all and are focused on them will they start organizing in a constructive fashion the flow of information they're plunged in. Absence of focus is the number one factor behind the trend of collective stupidity that is so common on the web. To the contrary, being project-driven allows you to extract constructive meaning from the seemingly random information you come across. Focus can turn noise into gold. Valuing user's projects as an important part of their lives can be done quite efficiently by tying projects to people's social identity. Give users the motivation to perseverate and see their dreams through Having the vision is the first step, but too often the feedback from the web can throw your first attempts back at your face. Reaching the right crowd can be a painstaking, awfully long process when it really shouldn't be. If the web can make it so that quality producers can stay focused, everything else will follow. In the best creative communities out there, social is leveraged to keep users on the right track. The content that users produce and share becomes part of their identity, and the warm, constructive social feedback received from the community –and often enough from people playing a mentor role– motivates them to overcome the daily obstacles of their creative pursuits. I believe these logics can be replicated at a much larger scale. By shaping our content-propagation system into a creative meritocracy at the scale of the entire web, we can associate a high reward feedback with quality production, creating an effective incentive for users to work harder toward their creative goals. Currently, quality content is too often striving to be seen while piano-playing cats harvest tens of millions of hits. As for constructive feedback, let's not even talk about it. The reason? Content-propagation processes that focus merely on critical mass. Give users access to inspiration We humans tend to always make more of the same, to gravitate towards the areas we already know. What you can imagine is limited by what's you've seen so far. Fostering uniqueness and quality can only be done by exposing the right people to the right content. Imagine a web that would be like a "good librarian". A librarian friend that knows you, your tastes and your dreams, and knows everything they have in stock on the tip of their fingers. The next book the good librarian will suggest to you will be precisely the one that is most likely to make you grow further, the one that will most resonate with your identity and your projects, that will most inspire you, make you glimpse new horizons. “ Imagine a web that would be like a good librarian Sadly that good librarian is not StumbleUpon. Not yet. Although a very good product, its internal logic is still one of critical-mass-focused content propagation. Besides, SU is entirely centered on consumption, rather than creation. I would say, actually, that it is centered on distraction –the opposite of what we want. At the other end of the spectrum, I have this vision of intelligent, constructive recommendation engines powered by the crowd's collective intelligence and bootstrapped by advanced AI. More on that soon... Give users access to learning Since the industrial revolution, learning has been classroom-based. A static, boring, asynchronous, potential-wasting state of intellectual subjugation. That was a model from before the Internet, from a time where knowledge was scarce and barriers to access it were many. A model conceived to meet the needs of an industry-centered civilization that we no longer live But today things don't have to be that way. Today knowledge is everywhere. It gets crowd-sourced, it gets curated, catalogued, tutorialized. Today learning can be social. Learning can be on-demand. Learning can be game-like. Technical knowledge should never be the limit. Free user's time so they can use it in productive ways Scarcity is not the problem –abundance is. Day after day, social media is gnawing at our free time and over-information is chopping up our attention span, focus and sense-making ability. As any lucid twitter addict knows, it's starting to be a real problem. “ The web has become a huge distraction. But it doesn't have to be that way But I believe that exploring the space of information can be done in a time efficient-way, that gets you focused back on your productive pursuits. The current web wants your mind to get filled with information that is attention-catching, or that is simply fun to know, instead of favoring only what's constructive, what's necessary to move forward. The web has become a huge distraction. But it doesn't have to be that way. The web can be project-centric. Social can be constructive. It's all about content-propagation logics. (More soon on the Information Diet and serendipity management.) That is it. Contrarily to countless social media companies, I don't care about people's lives. I don't want to index information about them. I care about what people can come up with. I care about what they can create. About ideas and creativity. Collective intelligence. I want you to be great. And if you could care less about being a creator and a leader, I'm going to start by getting you motivated. I want you to be excited about something. I want you to start projects, and work on them with all your heart. I want you to contribute to the global edifice with something unique. What do you say?

“ There's a real need to incorporate into web products some sort of strategy for bettering the quality of the content being produced and consumed

Get users to start up content-production projects, and give value to these projects

Give users the motivation to perseverate and see their dreams through

Give users access to inspiration

“ Imagine a web that would be like a good librarian

Give users access to learning

Free user's time so they can use it in productive ways

“ The web has become a huge distraction. But it doesn't have to be that way

That is it.

---

## [The Piano Playing Cat Paradigm](https://fchollet.com/blog/the-piano-playing-cat-paradigm.html)

2010/12/05

What's the common point between Youtube's future tools for serendipity-based browsing, and the social browser RockMelt? Both were presented to the public sometime last October, and both presentations humorously featured the infamous Youtube piano-playing-cat video as the archetypical example of the sort of content that we users like to discover and share out there. Now that's just an example. What's a bit more striking than the piano-playing-cat reference is the overall pointlessness of the social sharing and content exploring featured in both presentations. If I were to judge from the kind of product pitch I come across every week, I would say that startups and big companies alike are currently devoting their energy to engineering the technological solutions for a world even more cluttered with useless garbage coming from your friends and from automated recommendations. Garbage that is "fun". Isn't that exciting? “ Startups and big companies alike are currently devoting their energy to engineering the technological solutions for a world even more cluttered with useless garbage coming from your friends and from automated recommendations. Garbage that is "fun". Think about your Facebook feed. Whoever you are, there's a good chance that it looks like an endless list of pointless notifications and status updates that take more time to read than they took to think out. Mine certainly does. How much of it is genuine, fulfilling social interaction, and how much is meaningless button-clicking? How much of the shared content is stuff that you will be actually glad to have found? How much will you even remember by the next morning? As of now Facebook users are spending over 11 billion hours on Facebook in a month. If you think about it, that is a lot of human time. It takes 10 hours to complete a detailled digital painting. It takes 10,000 hours to code a new OS from scratch. It takes 10,000,000 hours to build a moon rocket. It probably took less than 100 hours to make to first version of the Facebook, which is the time an above-average user spends on the site over four or five months. Double that and you get the time you would need to, say, write a novel, or get a basic working knowledge of Japanese. To make a gross approximation based on the average hourly wage in the US, people's time on FB is worth $2,926 billion a year. That is more than the GDP of my country, which is the 5th highest out there. Facebook has already eaten a large part of the lives of its users, purely and simply, with no returns whatsoever for them, not even social nor emotional ones. And it's not on its way to stop. I wouldn't want to sound dramatic, but let's face the obvious question: are friend-feeds and piano-playing-cat videos the best use of our time on earth? And I'm not talking about building rockets, or about money. I'm talking about the intellectual, cultural and social value that our interactions could generate during our time online if the network organization were adequate. I'm talking about how much more exciting our lives could become if our daily use of the Internet were to switch from a mere struggle against boredom to constructive sharing, discovering and building. The Internet, today, is a major distraction. I feel that the time-eating, brain-numbing user-generated-content catalogue it has for the most part become is not really the best thing we could have made out of it. If the Internet made it as easy, from a psychological perspective, to spend an evening working productively on some awesome and highly-motivating personal project, than to spend an evening watching "great" Youtube videos or beating your friends' score at Bejeweled, I think you too would choose the first option every single time. You and everyone. If only because it would be overwhelmingly more "fun" and personally fulfilling. Not to mention, actually productive and materially beneficial on the long run. Now I'm not saying that the entire Internet is a waste of users' time. There are many places of constructive exchange and productivity, even learning, on the Web. If I were to speak for myself, a lot of what I have learned to this day I taught it to myself on the net. I would go as far as saying that everything that I truly know comes from self-teaching, and that the Internet was in nearly every case the trigger and the ladder. Everything that went into the making of this article, for instance, is brought to you by the Internet. Up to my knowledge of English. Bill Gates famously stated at the Techonomy conference last August that five years from now, the best education will come from the web. And I think that's true. It's not just TED and the MIT OpenCourseWare, which are after all merely one-way and with little to no interactions between users, nor feedback. It's also peer-powered projects such as the mighty Wikipedia. And importantly, the myriad of creative communities out there, where people exchange inspiration, motivation, and technical knowledge regarding their content-production endeavors, and team up for the sake of still greater projects. Synergy is the key – a key both psychological and technical. Right now we're living on a humanity-sized network where the most pointless activities are neighbors to the most exciting possibilities. The thing is, we humans are capable of the worst as well as the best. Enhanced interactions between larger and larger groups of individuals –and with the contents they generate– has had the obvious result of empowering every side of human activity –that is "collective intelligence effect". Including the regrettable sides. After language, books, and so on, the Internet is now the "new" paradigm of interpersonal communication, and these days, though it saddens me to say, it tends to be used rather for collective stupidity than collective intelligence. But don't go believing that mutually wasting our friends' time and potential –as well as ours– is our natural way of interacting with others and with the world. It's not. Let me stress this one point : our use of the Internet is conditioned by its infrastructure. By the underlying logic of current social networks and browsing tools. “ Our use of the Internet is conditioned by its infrastructure. By the underlying logic of current social networks and browsing tools. And today this infrastructure seems to be implementing what I call the "piano-playing-cat paradigm". With its lack of semantic integration, its fragmentary nature and –most of all– its focus on viewcount-based popularity, it tends to favor content that is short, obvious, and that is "fun". Fun in the piano-playing-cat sense. Because this fun factor tends to attract users' attention, and attention is the Internet currency. Nicely done, Facebook. And this is not just about what sort of content is being shared the most –though it is content that will, ultimately, define the user's worldview and intelligence. It's also about what possibilities users have to interact so as to synergetically produce new and exciting content. And so far? They've hardly had any. Wikis and 2001-type forums are still the "best" tools for collective building. How sad is that? I have this vision of an open Web of incredible contents, structured as a human mind, where serendipity would induce guidance rather than confusion. A web where users would be inspired by each other, motivated by each other, educated by each other, and working together to achieve their personal dreams. A web where productivity would become the easiest and most enjoyable thing. A web where social interaction would be more real than ever, centered on genuine sharing rather than empty button-clicking. A web where our interests would move away from piano-playing-cats and to more fulfilling endeavors and content consumption. A cognitive social web. Perhaps you will object to this vision, "That's unrealistic. If the Youtube-type fun factor has been privileged so far, it is simply because that's what users really seek. It attracts attention because it's the best at attracting attention. There's nothing you can do about that". Let me disagree. If there's one thing I understood from investigating developmental psychology, it's that the human brain is not wired to enjoy piano-playing-cat videos above everything else. Productivity, creativity and curiosity may well be the most powerful attention-capturing assets that we tool-makers will ever have at hand. And when attention is a currency, the cognitive social web is the 100-dollar- bill printer. “ The human brain is not wired to enjoy piano-playing-cat videos above everything else. Productivity, creativity and curiosity may well be the most powerful attention-capturing assets that we tool-makers will ever have at hand. We are currently knee-deep in the piano-playing-cat paradigm, and that's a bit too bad. Time to reverse the trend?

“ Startups and big companies alike are currently devoting their energy to engineering the technological solutions for a world even more cluttered with useless garbage coming from your friends and from automated recommendations. Garbage that is "fun".

“ Our use of the Internet is conditioned by its infrastructure. By the underlying logic of current social networks and browsing tools.

“ The human brain is not wired to enjoy piano-playing-cat videos above everything else. Productivity, creativity and curiosity may well be the most powerful attention-capturing assets that we tool-makers will ever have at hand.

---

